Update readme (#149)
orcestra-campaign/flight_segmentation: README.md

Author: Once we've agreed on the content of the README.md update, I will go through the file once more and implement this suggestion to make future changes easier.

# Segmentation of HALO research flights

> The research flights during ORCESTRA can be divided into segments which are specific time intervals during a flight with coherent characteristics. The coherent characteristics, referred to as "kinds", typically refer to the aircraft's state during a flight maneuver as read out from the aircraft position and flight attitude data, such as a roughly contant heading, altitude, and roll angle on a `straight_leg`, or a fairly circular flight path on a `circle`. Further, kinds may indicate colocated measurements with the EarthCARE (EC) satellite (`ec_track`) or other campaign platforms such as the ATR aircraft (`atr_coordination`). Apart from time *intevals* referred to as `segments`, the flight segmentation also contains *single points in time* referred to as `events` which also get specified by kinds and mark, for instance, the time at which the aircraft was closest in space and time to the EC satellite (`ec_underpass`), the Meteor research vessel (`meteor_overpass`), or ground measurement stations such as the CVAO in Mindelo (`cvao_overpass`) or the BCO on Barbados (`bco_overpass`).

Reviewer: There is one more typo: contant --> constant
```suggestion
The research flights during ORCESTRA can be divided into segments which are specific time intervals during a flight with coherent characteristics. The coherent characteristics, referred to as "kinds", typically refer to the aircraft's state during a flight maneuver as read out from the aircraft position and flight attitude data, such as a roughly constant heading, altitude, and roll angle on a `straight_leg`, or a fairly circular flight path on a `circle`. Further, kinds may indicate colocated measurements with the EarthCARE (EC) satellite (`ec_track`) or other campaign platforms such as the ATR aircraft (`atr_coordination`). Apart from time *intervals* referred to as `segments`, the flight segmentation also contains *single points in time* referred to as `events` which also get specified by kinds and mark, for instance, the time at which the aircraft was closest in space and time to the EC satellite (`ec_underpass`), the Meteor research vessel (`meteor_overpass`), or ground measurement stations such as the CVAO in Mindelo (`cvao_overpass`) or the BCO on Barbados (`bco_overpass`).
```

> The research flights during ORCESTRA can be divided into segments which are specific time intervals during a flight with coherent characteristics. The coherent characteristics, referred to as "kinds", typically refer to the aircraft's state during a flight maneuver as read out from the aircraft position and flight attitude data, such as a roughly contant heading, altitude, and roll angle on a `straight_leg`, or a fairly circular flight path on a `circle`. Further, kinds may indicate colocated measurements with the EarthCARE (EC) satellite (`ec_track`) or other campaign platforms such as the ATR aircraft (`atr_coordination`). Apart from time *intevals* referred to as `segments`, the flight segmentation also contains *single points in time* referred to as `events` which also get specified by kinds and mark, for instance, the time at which the aircraft was closest in space and time to the EC satellite (`ec_underpass`), the Meteor research vessel (`meteor_overpass`), or ground measurement stations such as the CVAO in Mindelo (`cvao_overpass`) or the BCO on Barbados (`bco_overpass`).

Author: Somehow I can't spot what has changed between the red and green version. Can you point it out to me?

    segments:
      - segment_id: HALO-20240811a_7051
        name: EC_track_southward_const_alt
        start: 2024-08-11 12:29:59
        end: 2024-08-11 14:03:40
        kinds:
          - straight_leg
          - ec_track
        remarks:
          - 'irregularity: turbulence 2024-08-11T13:02:15 - 2024-08-11T13:12:00'
      - segment_id: HALO-20240811a_50ca
        name: circle_south
        start: 2024-08-11 14:17:00
        end: 2024-08-11 15:16:17
        kinds:
          - circle
        remarks: []
        clat: 5.000066183128026
        clon: -26.999928980187303
        radius: 133094.75108481143
```

#### File and flight header
In order to allow other sub-campaigns to add their flight/ship track segmentation, the file begins with a general header stating the campaign platform (HALO, ATR, METEOR,...), followed by the segmentation information for the individual research flights which are each denoted by their `flight_id` (e.g. HALO-20240811a). Each flight has the following attributes: `mission` affiliation (ORCESTRA), `platform`, `flight_id`, `takeoff` and `landing` time, `events`, and `segments`. Times are generally provided in format `YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS`.

#### Events

> The `events` attribute lists all the single points in time when underpasses and overpasses occurred. An event is specified by a *unique* `event_id`, constructed from the `flight_id` and a 4-digit hash computed from the event `time`, a `name` (a short qualitative description), a `time`, and the event `kinds` (e.g. ec_underpass). The attribute `remarks` may contain custom comments about irregularities or other noteworthy information. Last, the `distance` between HALO and the other platform (e.g. EarthCARE satellite), as projected on the Earth's surface, is provided in meters.

Reviewer: In @tmieslinger's addition "...the coordinates in from of latitude and longitude..." there is a typo: "from" --> "form"

While `event_id`, `segment_id`, as well as `time`, `start`, and `end` are mandatory attributes for events and segments, the other attributes are optional although providing the `kinds` attribute, which can be thought of as tags, is highly recommended because it constitutes the primary filtering criterion. A list of all tags currently in use is provided below.

## Definition of kinds
Kinds may or may not apply/be adopted for all platforms. For the first version of the segmentation of HALO research flights, one or more of the following kinds are assigned to each segment:

| kind | used for | description
| --------| ------- | ------- |
| ascent       | segments | assigned to straight legs or circles during which the aircraft altitude was increased systematically by more than a few meters |

> | atr_coordination | segments | assigned to circles that were also flown by the ATR aircraft on the same day |

Reviewer: There is an excess blank in @tmieslinger's suggestion: "...collocated measurements  in time and space..." --> "...collocated measurements in time and space..."

> | atr_coordination | segments | assigned to circles that were also flown by the ATR aircraft on the same day |

Author: I believe there was a case where HALO flew the ATR circle long after the ATR had flown that same circle. In this case, the sampling was not colocated in space AND time but just in time. I would still label such a case with `atr_coordination`. What do you think?

> | atr_coordination | segments | assigned to circles that were also flown by the ATR aircraft on the same day |

Author: Also: "collocated" is not the same as "colocated" (or "co-located"), and I suggest, we use "colocated"

| cvao_overpass | events | assigned to events where the aircraft almost exactly overpassed the Cape Verde Atmospheric Observatory in Mindelo|
| descent      | segments | assigned to straight legs or circles during which the aircraft altitude was decreased systematically by more than a few meters |
| ec_track     | segments | assigned to straight legs during which the aircraft followed the EarthCare track |
| ec_underpass | events | assigned to events where the aircraft almost exactly underpassed the EarthCARE satellite |
| meteor_coordination | segments | assigned to circles that were flown around or in the vicinity of the Meteor research vessel |
| meteor_overpass | events | assigned to events where the aircraft almost exactly overpassed the Meteor research vessel |
| pace_track | segments | assigned to straight legs during which the aircraft followed the PACE track; note that measurements taken in other segments may also be colocated with PACE due to the satellite's wide swath. |
| pace_underpass | events | assigned to events where the aircraft almost exactly underpassed the PACE satellite |

> | radar_calibration | segments | flight maneuver typically conducted on a straight leg, where the aircraft's roll angle is alternated once or twice between around ±20&deg;; the segment starts and ends at about 0&deg; roll angle.|

Author: I might have seen a radar calibration where only one alternation was performed but am not sure of it... Would accept your suggestion for now but let's keep it in mind for when we go through all calibrations again.

> | straight_leg | segments | flight pattern with approximately constant heading and a roll angle close to 0&deg;; short-term roll angle deviations beyond ±2&deg; due to turbulence are mentioned as irregularities in the remarks attribute|

Reviewer: I don't know how strict you have been about this ±2 degree definition, but I haven't for my flights. I only mentioned visually outstanding turbulences, which may or may have not exceeded ±2 degrees. In case of a very turbulent leg, this also means that I haven't remarked turbulence events of more than ±2 degrees as an irregularity since they are not outstanding compared to the rest of the leg. Thus I suggest to modify this a bit:

```suggestion
| straight_leg | segments | flight pattern with approximately constant heading and a roll angle close to 0&deg;; outstanding short-term roll angle deviations (approximately beyond ±2&deg;) due to turbulence are mentioned as irregularities in the remarks attribute|
```

| circle_clockwise | segments | assigned to circles that were flown in clockwise direction (i. e. with a positive roll angle) |
| circle_counterclockwise | segments | assigned to circles that were flown in counterclockwise direction (i. e. with negative roll angle) |

<!-- #region -->
## HALO segmentation workflow for developers

The flight segmentation workflow broadly consists of three phases:
1. Segmentation of a flight
2. Review of the segmentation in pairs (the person who performed the segmentation + one other colleague)
3. Handover of the final flight segmentation (along with suggestions for how to improve the flight report where necessary) to the corresponding flight-PI for cross-checking.

How to contribute to the flight segmentation:

1. Fork the flight segmentation repository
2. Install the requirements noted [here](environment.yaml) as well as the [IPFS Desktop App](https://docs.ipfs.tech/install/ipfs-desktop/), e.g. on Mac via `brew install --cask ipfs`.

> 3. Build a respective python environment, e.g. `mamba  env create -f environment.yaml`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Build a respective python environment, e.g. `mamba env create -f environment.yaml`
```

          - 'irregularity: turbulence 2024-08-11T13:02:15 - 2024-08-11T13:12:00'
      - segment_id: HALO-20240811a_50ca
        name: circle_south
        start: 2024-08-11 14:17:00
        end: 2024-08-11 15:16:17
        kinds:
          - circle
        remarks: []
        clat: 5.000066183128026
        clon: -26.999928980187303
        radius: 133094.75108481143
```

We make use of a typical YAML block style for structuring the segmentation data. In order to allow other sub-campaigns to add their flight/ship track segmentation, the file begins with a general block stating the campaign platform (HALO, ATR, METEOR,...). The second level is formed by blocks containing the segmentation information for individual research flights denoted by their `flight_id` (e.g. HALO-20240811a). Each flight-block includes a mapping of the following attributes: `mission` affiliation (ORCESTRA), `platform`, `flight_id`, `takeoff` and `landing` time, `events`, and `segments`. `events`and `segements` are special in the sense that they further include lists of respective events or flight segments from the respective flight. Times are generally provided in format `YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS`.

#### Events

> The `events` attribute lists all the single points in time when underpasses and overpasses occurred. An event is specified by a *unique* `event_id`, constructed from the `flight_id` and a hash computed from the event `time`, a `name` (a short qualitative description), a `time`, and the event `kinds` (e.g. ec_underpass). The attribute `remarks` may contain custom comments about irregularities or other noteworthy information. Last, the `distance` between HALO and the other platform (e.g. EarthCARE satellite), as projected on the Earth's surface, is provided in meters. In case of an event that describes a meeting point with another moving platform, e.g. the Meteor ship, the coordinates in from of latitude and longitude of that second moving platform are stated, too. For an `meteor_overpass` the key/value pairs for `meteor_lat`and `meteor_lon` would be added to the event.

Author: ```suggestion
The `events` attribute lists all the single points in time when underpasses and overpasses occurred. An event is specified by a *unique* `event_id`, constructed from the `flight_id` and a hash computed from the event `time`, a `name` (a short qualitative description), a `time`, and the event `kinds` (e.g. ec_underpass). The attribute `remarks` may contain custom comments about irregularities or other noteworthy information. Last, the `distance` between HALO and the other platform (e.g. EarthCARE satellite), as projected on the Earth's surface, is provided in meters. In case of an event that describes a meeting point with another moving platform, e.g. the Meteor ship, the coordinates in the form of latitude and longitude of that second moving platform are stated, too. For instance, in the case of a `meteor_overpass`, the key/value pairs for `meteor_lat`and `meteor_lon` would be added to the event.
```

#### Segments

> After the event listing, `segments` lists all identified flight segments which follow a similar structure as `events` with a *unique* `segment_id`, a `name`, a specification of the time interval by a `start` and `end` time (which both enter the computation of the hash used for `segment_id`), `kinds`, and `remarks`. Note that the time ranges, constructed from `start` and `end` are defined as semi-open intervals, i.e. while the start time is inside the segment, the end time is not. This allows for an unambiguous definition of exactly consecutive segments. For segments of kind `circle`, the latitude `clat` and longitude `clon` of the circle center, as well as the circle `radius` in meters are added as additional attributes. As for events, the `remarks` attribute lists free text comments, including irregularities such as deviations from envisioned flight track due to deep convection or roll angle spikes due to turbulence which one may want to exclude from scientific analysis. To enable automated checking, such irregularity remarks start with "irregularity:".

Author: ```suggestion
After the event listing, `segments` lists all identified flight segments which follow a similar structure as `events` with a *unique* `segment_id`, a `name`, a specification of the time interval by a `start` and `end` time (which both enter the computation of the hash used for `segment_id`), `kinds`, and `remarks`. Note that the time ranges, constructed from `start` and `end` are defined as semi-open intervals, i.e. while the start time is inside the segment, the end time is not. This allows for an unambiguous definition of exactly consecutive segments. For segments of kind `circle`, the latitude `clat` and longitude `clon` of the circle center, as well as the circle `radius` in meters are added as additional attributes. As for events, the `remarks` attribute lists free text comments, including irregularities such as deviations from the envisioned flight track due to deep convection or roll angle spikes due to turbulence which one may want to exclude from scientific analysis. To enable automated checking, such irregularity remarks start with "irregularity:".
```

While `event_id`, `segment_id`, as well as `time`, `start`, and `end` are mandatory attributes for events and segments, all other attributes are optional. Nevertheless, providing the `kinds` attribute, which can be thought of as tags, is highly recommended because it constitutes the primary filtering criterion. A list of all tags currently in use is provided below.

## Definition of kinds
Kinds may or may not apply/be adopted for all platforms. For the first version of the segmentation of HALO research flights, one or more of the following kinds are assigned to each segment or event:

| kind | used for | description
| --------| ------- | ------- |
| ascent       | segments | assigned to straight legs or circles during which the aircraft altitude was increased systematically by more than a few meters, typically to a new [flight level](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flight_level). |

> | atr_coordination | segments | assigned to circles that were also flown by the ATR aircraft on the same day |

Author: ```suggestion
| atr_coordination | segments | assigned to segments, typically circles, during which HALO took measurements colocated in space and time with the ATR aircraft (not necessarily with a direct overpass of the two aircrafts); in some cases, the measurements were only colocated in space. |
```

Reviewer: I think in case the measurements are only colocated in space, we should give that information as a remark in the respective circle segment.

| bco_overpass | events | assigned to events where the aircraft flew roughly over the [Barbados Cloud Observatory](https://barbados.mpimet.mpg.de/). |
| c_pirouette  | segments | assigned to circles that were flown around an individual cloud object |

> | circle       | segments | roughly circular flight pattern, identified by a fairly constant change of aircraft heading at fairly constant roll angles between ±(1.5 to 5)&deg;, depending on the circle radius; HALO flew two typical circle configurations: a standard circle with a radius of about 133km and a duration of about one hour, and a smaller circle with a radius of about 70km and a duration of about 40min which was frequent in coordination with ATR measurements (`atr_coordination`); most circles were associated with the launch of dropsondes, typically 12 per circle at every 30&deg; heading; in cases where the first (last) dropsonde of the circle was launched before (after) roll angle and change in heading match the circle characteristics described above, the start (end) time of the circle segment is taken to be the `launch_time` of the respective dropsonde minus (plus) 1 second; some circles were highly irregular due to deviations around deep convection in which case this is mentioned in an irregularity `remark`.|

Author: ```suggestion
| circle       | segments | roughly circular flight pattern, identified by a fairly constant change of aircraft heading at fairly constant roll angles between ±(1.5 to 5)&deg;, depending on the circle radius; HALO flew two typical circle configurations: a standard circle with a radius of about 133km and a duration of about one hour, and a smaller circle with a radius of about 70km and a duration of about 40min, typically flown in coordination with ATR measurements (`atr_coordination`); most circles were associated with the launch of dropsondes, typically 12 per circle at every 30&deg; heading; in cases where the first (last) dropsonde of the circle was launched before (after) roll angle and change in heading match the circle characteristics described above, the start (end) time of the circle segment is taken to be the `launch_time` of the respective dropsonde minus (plus) 1 second; some circles were highly irregular due to deviations around deep convection in which case this is mentioned in an irregularity `remark`.|
```

| circle_clockwise | segments | assigned to `circles` that were flown in clockwise direction (i. e. with a positive roll angle) |
| circle_counterclockwise | segments | assigned to `circles` that were flown in counterclockwise direction (i. e. with negative roll angle) |
| cvao_overpass | events | assigned to events where the aircraft flew roughly over the Cape Verde Atmospheric Observatory in Mindelo|
| descent      | segments | assigned to straight legs or circles during which the aircraft altitude was decreased systematically by more than a few meters |
| ec_track     | segments | assigned to straight legs during which the aircraft followed the EarthCare track. Aircraft and EarthCare flight direction can be the same or opposite. |
| ec_underpass | events | assigned to events where the aircraft flew as close as possible under the EarthCARE satellite |

> | meteor_coordination | segments | assigned to segments that were flown around or in the vicinity of the Meteor research vessel |

Author: ```suggestion
| meteor_coordination | segments | assigned to segments during which HALO flew around or in the vicinity of the Meteor research vessel |
```

3. Build a respective python environment, e.g. `mamba env create -f environment.yaml`
4. Assign yourself to an existing open segmentation issue of this repository or a new one that you created for your development goal.
5. Make a change to an existing segmentation file in `scripts` by opening it as an ipython notebook, or create a new segmentation file by making a copy of the file `scripts/segmentation_template.md`, renaming it accordingly. In the case of a new file, load the BAHAMAS and dropsonde data to determine the individual segments, using a mix of bokeh and other plots of roll angle, altitude, heading or other measures. The corresponding [flight report](https://github.com/orcestra-campaign/book/tree/main/orcestra_book/reports) aids the identification of irregularities and rare flight maneuvers such as instrument calibrations.
7. Test the build of the `all_flight.yaml` by executing `make -j` in the top level folder of your cloned repository.
9. Add your final notebook file to the repository by creating a pull request and assigning a reviewer.

> 10. Review your segmentation together with one other colleague. You can use the automated HTML reports generated by the Makefile. Locally they are available at `/reports/*.html` after executing `make -j`. When a PR is merged the github workflows generate and publish all files from the `/reports` folder at https://orcestra-campaign.github.io/flight_segmentation/.

Author: ```suggestion
10. Review your segmentation together with one other colleague. You can use the automated HTML reports generated by the Makefile. Locally they are available at `/reports/*.html` after executing `make -j`. When a PR is merged, the GitHub workflows generate and publish all files from the `/reports` folder at https://orcestra-campaign.github.io/flight_segmentation/.
```
